# COVID-19-in-the-United-States

# Over the past few months, I have been enrolled a data science program at UCLA. For our final project, we were tasked with running doing research and running analysis on a topic of our choice. Since COVID-19 has been the most important topic in the United States over the past year, I figured it would be a good topic to analyze. I wanted to study the effects the virus had on different parts of the country. I wanted to study the factors that contributed to the spread of this virus on the county level through out the United States, and use these findings to come up with ways that might be able to help bring an end to this pandemic and prevent future pandemics. The following is a write up of my process and analysis.


# COVID-19 Throughout the United States
# Capstone Project
# Chris LaLone


#   The COVID-19 pandemic has fundamentally changed the world over the past year. It has affected how everyone goes about their daily lives. Whether you live in New York City, or a small rural town in the midwestern United States, the impacts have been drastic. It is known that when the virus first entered the country, the highly populated areas of the country were the major hubs that allowed this virus to spread. Thinking logically, this just makes sense. Compared to rural areas, big cities have a denser population and see a much higher rate of daily face-to-face interactions. Places like packed office buildings, grocery stores, and public transportation created an ideal environment for the virus to spread.     

#   For this study, I wanted to try and highlight why different parts of the country reacted differently to the spread of the virus. First, I wanted to collect the daily totals for number of cases and number of deaths for each county in the United States. Then, I wanted to combine that information with as many different variables as possible that might be able to help explain the variation in the spread of this virus over time. To do this, I chose three dates during the pandemic to highlight: April 1, 2020, October 1, 2020, and February 20, 2021. The first date was chosen to see the initial impacts of the pandemic. The World Health Organization declared the COVID-19 situation to be a global pandemic in mid-March 2020, but the tracking of cases in the United States had begun late December 2019 and early January 2020. I chose April because it is still early in the pandemic, but there was enough data that had been collected to set a baseline for this study. For the second date, I wanted to see the growth of the virus six months later. Many states had gone through lockdown periods as well as instituted mask mandates and social distancing guidelines. Also, the summer months had passed during in which a few surges of increased infection rates resulted from major holidays. Finally, the third date was chosen to gauge a present-day outlook on the situation. The major winter holidays like Thanksgiving, Christmas, and New Years had passed, but also the extensive vaccination process was underway. I believe that these three time periods provided insight to allow me to explore the effects of the virus on the county level over time throughout the U.S.

#   I began this study with the data collection process. Because COVID-19 has been such a major topic over the past year, there was no shortage of strong, reliable data sources for case and death totals on the county level. I settled on the database from USAFacts.org. This site has a detailed breakdown of totals for each county and is updated daily. I then had to begin my search for good independent variables. I leaned heavily on the U.S. Census and the American Community 5-Year Survey for 2019. These sources provided a large number of social, economic, and demographic variables down to the county level. When sourcing my variables, I wanted to convert as many as possible to percentage of county population to provide an even scale across counties of all sizes. After combing through the census and the ACS for 2019, I still felt like I needed more variables. I reached out to Prof. William, and he was happy to provide a paper, published in June 2020, from the National Bureau of Economic Research. The group completed a study similar to mine about impacts of COVID-19 on the county level. Once the collection process was over, I had about 50 good variables that I thought would be able to explain the spread of the virus throughout the U.S.  Some of these variables include age ranges, gender, racial demographics, public transport usage, political leanings, and unemployment rates. The full list can be seen in the appendix at the end of this report. 

#   Once I had my data, it was time to begin formatting it correctly for analysis. Since I had sourced variables from different sources, the data sets did not always line up perfectly. This led to missing values in some cases. Fortunately, the sources I used were fairly complete, so the overall number of missing values was relatively low. For the missing values I did have, I chose to do simple imputation on a case-by-case basis by imputing the overall mean of the variable in question. I believe that this did not affect the results of the analysis. 

#   After the data was formatted, it was time to begin the analysis phase. I began with looking at the counties with the highest number of cases and deaths at each stage of the pandemic. Early on in the pandemic, not surprisingly, the counties with the larger populations were the ones with the highest case totals. These findings remained consistent throughout the whole pandemic in places like New York, Los Angeles, Seattle, Detroit, and Chicago. These are some of the highest populated areas of the country and it makes sense that higher population rates translate to higher COVID-19 incidence. It is important to note that these are also very diverse communities with a high percentage of minorities; this will become important during the regression analysis phase. As the pandemic raged on, we see in figures 4 and 6, areas like New York are still present, but counties in Texas and Florida now are present in the top 10. This is likely due to New York instituting a very strict stay at home order and masking policy, while places like Texas and Florida were much more conservative in their leanings and did not enforce such strict policies. This stayed consistent through to the most recent totals in figure 8. I would like to point out that Los Angeles County is by far the leader by the most recent totals, but I see this as an outlier because the population of Los Angeles County is over 10 million people and nearly twice as large as the next largest county, Cook County, Illinois (Chicago metro area). 

#   Incidence and death totals all pointed to a high correlation with higher populated areas, but what about case rates and death rates (i.e. cases and deaths as a percentage of total county population)? Once I began digging into this question, the results painted a different story. At the beginning of the pandemic, some of the counties with the highest case rates were smaller, more rural counties. In figure 2, it shows the highest infection rates are split between some larger counties like the surrounding areas of New York, but also some smaller counties. In figures 5 and 9, we can see that as the pandemic continues, nearly all the counties with the highest infection rates and death rates are small, rural areas with low populations. This was one of the main driving forces of my regression analysis. 

#   For the regression analysis, I wanted to study four dependent variables over the three time periods. The dependent variables are number of cases, number of deaths, case rates, and deaths rates. The full regression outputs can be seen in the appendix.

#   I began with number of cases as my dependent variables. Starting with April 1st, the most significant variables are total population and public transport usage. This all makes sense because early in the pandemic, the larger the population the more cases a county would see, and if they had a higher usage of public transportation then it would allow it to spread faster. For October 1st, I did not include total population in the model, because when I did the adj. R-squared was in the high 90%, which is an unrealistic output. Without total population, the adj. R squared was 0.248. The most significant predictors being the minority populations, air pollution levels, and median income. Another one of note is the mask mandate variable. For the second and third dates I added a variable indicating whether the county was in a state with a state-wide mask mandate. The counties that did have an active mandate had a negative correlation to the number of cases, indicating that masking leads to fewer cases. Finally, for the third date the results seem to carry over from October. The main significant predictors are, again, minority populations, air pollution levels, median income, and mask mandates. This indicates that counties with higher minority population and air pollution levels see more cases. All of this points to what we already thought, large metro areas see more cases. 

#   When observing number of deaths as the dependent variable, the results are largely the same as they were for number of cases. If a county has more cases, then it will see more deaths. The major predictors also largely remain the same: total population, median income, masking, air pollution, minority communities, and public transportation. In some of the models, another variable of note is uninsured adults. This was negatively correlated with cases and deaths in some instances. This indicates that people who are uninsured took more precautions to make sure they did not get sick, because if they did then they would have to pay for the treatment out of pocket. 

#   What I was more interested to observe are the models about case rates and death rates. The models for first date suggest that the most important predictors for case rates were total population, minority communities (specifically the black communities), life expectancy, and public transportation usage. These results are also echoed in the model for death rates. As the pandemic raged on and cases begin to rapidly increase, total population no longer was a predictor for case rates and death rates. In October, the most important predictors of note were masking mandates and minority communities with the exception being the Asian community rates which were not significant. This is a contrast from the beginning of the pandemic, where the counties with a higher percentage of Asian population saw an increase in case rates. This might stem from the fact that this virus did originate in the Wuhan province of China. Combine that with the fact that the Chinese New Year lines up with the beginning of the pandemic; it might begin to provide some explanation. Another area I would like to highlight is the GOPWin variable. This variable is for those counties that voted for President Trump in the 2020 election. This variable saw a positive correlation with case rates, which might provide some explanation for why the rural counties saw higher case rates. Finally, for February 2021, we can see how the smaller counties react after almost a full year of cases. Some of the most significant predictors for case rates and deaths rates were masking mandates, unemployment rate, life expectancy, and, again, minority communities. I’ve touched on most of those already, but unemployment rate is an interesting one. Counties with higher unemployment rate saw a lower case rate. This might indicate that if a person is unemployed then they are probably staying indoors more often because they aren’t working, making it less likely to get infected. The predictors I mentioned are not the only important ones and the full models with all the significant predictors can be seen in the appendix.

#   After taking in all the information from these models, I found some valuable takeaways. One of the most common predictors across all the models was the significance of minority communities. Underserved communities seemed to take the brunt of the pandemic, seeing higher case rates which leads to higher death rates. Another major factor that was consistent across the pandemic was the introduction of masking and social distancing guidelines. The analysis indicated that these policies work and those areas that has less strict guidelines or none at all paid the price. Another big point is that rural counties, despite having lower populations, saw higher case rates and death rates. There is no singular reason for this. Maybe some people just did not take the pandemic as seriously because they didn’t see a higher total number of cases. Perhaps these rural areas could not afford to go into full lockdown mode like the larger metro areas did. In a county of 5,000 people, the local economy is very dependent on each citizen, so for everyone’s livelihood to remain intact many businesses needed to remain open.

#   Now, knowing all of this, how can we use it to help end this pandemic and help prevent future pandemics? First, it is important to stress the use of masking and social distancing. It is imperative to educate the community and get everyone on the same page when it comes to health literacy. In situations like this, trusting the science should come above all else, regardless of political leanings or personal beliefs. Next, it is imperative to invest in supporting underserved and minority communities. These were the areas hit hardest in all aspects of the pandemic. Providing easier and safer access to health care and health education would serve these areas very well for the future. Finally, now that vaccinations are rolling out, it is very important to get vaccinated when it comes time, and hopefully, the efforts in every state and county can bring about the end of the COVID-19 pandemic.

